Key facts
Globally, at least 2.2 billion people have a near or distance vision impairment. For at least 1 billion of these people, vision impairment could have been prevented or is yet to be addressed.
The leading causes of vision impairment and blindness are refractive errors and cataracts.
It is estimated that 2 out of 3 people in low-income countries who need eyeglasses don’t have access to them.
In addition, 1 in 2 people globally who need cataract surgery don’t have access to that surgery.
Vision impairment poses an enormous global financial burden, with the annual global cost of productivity estimated to be US$ 411 billion.
Vision loss can affect people of all ages; however, most people with vision impairment and blindness are over the age of 50 years.
Overview
Vision plays a critical role in every facet and stage of our lives.
Vision impairment occurs when an eye condition affects our ability to see clearly. Everyone, if they live long enough, will experience at least one eye condition in their lifetime that will require appropriate care.
Vision impairment can have serious consequences for the individual across the life course. Many of these consequences can be mitigated by timely access to quality eye care. Eye conditions that can cause vision impairment and blindness – such as cataract or refractive error – are the main focus of eye care strategies; nevertheless, the importance of eye conditions that do not typically cause vision impairment – such as dry eye or conjunctivitis – should not be overlooked. These conditions are frequently among the leading reasons for presentation to eye care services.
Causes
Globally, the leading causes of vision impairment and blindness are:
refractive errors
cataract
diabetic retinopathy
glaucoma
age-related macular degeneration.
There is substantial variation in the causes of vision impairment between and within countries. Key factors are the availability and affordability of eye care services as well as the level of awareness of the population about conditions affecting vision and how to prevent and manage them.  For example, the proportion of vision impairment attributable to unoperated cataract is higher in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries. In high-income countries, diseases such as glaucoma and age-related macular degeneration are more common.
Among children, congenital cataract is a leading cause of vision impairment in low-income countries, whereas in middle-income countries it is more likely to be retinopathy of prematurity.
Uncorrected refractive error remains a leading cause of vision impairment in all countries amongst both children and adult populations.
Prevalence
Globally, at least 2.2 billion people have a near or distance vision impairment. In at least 1 billion – or almost half – of these cases, vision impairment could have been prevented or has yet to be addressed.
Among these 1 billion people, the main conditions causing distance vision impairment or blindness are cataract (94 million), refractive error (88.4 million), age-related macular degeneration (8 million), glaucoma (7.7 million), and diabetic retinopathy (3.9 million)(1). The main condition causing near vision impairment is presbyopia (826 million)(2).
In terms of regional differences, the prevalence of distance vision impairment in low- and middle-income regions is estimated to be 4 times higher than in high-income regions(1). With regards to near vision, rates of unaddressed near vision impairment are estimated to be greater than 80% in western, eastern and central sub-Saharan Africa, while comparative rates in high-income regions of North America, Australasia, western Europe, and of Asia-Pacific are reported to be lower than 10%(2).
Population growth and ageing are increasing the risk that more people acquire vision impairment.
Impact of vision impairment
Personal impact
Young children with early onset irreversible severe vision impairment can experience delayed motor, language, emotional, social and cognitive development, with lifelong consequences. School-age children with vision impairment can also experience lower levels of educational achievement.
Vision impairment severely impacts quality of life among adult populations. Adults with vision impairment can experience lower rates of employment and higher rates of depression and anxiety.
In the case of older adults, vision impairment can contribute to social isolation, difficulty walking, a higher risk of falls and fractures, and a greater likelihood of early entry into nursing or care homes.
Economic impact
Vision impairment poses an enormous global financial burden with an estimated annual global productivity loss of about US$ 411 billion purchasing power parity(3). This figure far outweighs the estimatedUS$ 25 billion cost gap of addressing the unmet need of vision impairment.
Strategies to address eye conditions to avoid vision impairment
There are effective interventions covering promotion, prevention, treatment and rehabilitation which address the needs associated with eye conditions and vision impairment. While many cases of vision loss can be prevented (such as those due to infections, trauma, unsafe traditional medicines, perinatal diseases, nutrition-related diseases, unsafe use or self-administration of topical treatment), this is not possible for all. For many eye conditions, e.g. diabetic retinopathy, early detection and timely treatment are crucial to avoid irreversible vision loss. Eyeglasses correction for refractive error and surgery for cataract are among the most cost-effective of all health-care interventions. Yet,2 out of 3 people in low-income countries who need eyeglasses don’t have access to them(4) and 1 in 2 people globally who need cataract surgery can’t access this.
Treatment is also available for many eye conditions that do not typically cause vision impairment, such as dry eye, conjunctivitis and blepharitis, but generate discomfort and pain. Treatment of these conditions is directed at alleviating the symptoms and preventing the evolution towards more severe stages of those diseases.
Vision rehabilitation (an essential component of eye care services that enables people living with irreversible low vision to maximize their functional abilities, enhance their quality of life and participate fully in society) is very effective in improving functioning for people with an irreversible vision loss that can be caused by eye conditions such as diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, consequences of trauma, and age-related macular degeneration.
WHO response
WHO’s work is guided by the recommendations of theWHO World report on vision (2019)and the resolution on "Integrated, people-centred eye care, including preventable blindness and vision impairment" adopted at the Seventy-third World Health Assembly in 2020. The key strategy recommended in these documents is to make integrated people-centred eye care (IPEC) the care model of choice and to ensure its widespread implementation. It is expected that by shaping the global agenda on vision and eye care, the report and resolution will assist support efforts to reduce the burden of eye conditions and vision.
Some of WHO’s key areas of work and activities in the prevention of blindness include:
working with Member States and other partners in the field to monitor theglobal targets for 2030on integrated people-centred eye care;
supporting the integration of eye care in health systems through the implementation of a series of technical tools;
supporting capacity-building of health workers who can provide care for the eyes;
support countries to assess the provision of eye care services through the implementation of situation analysis tools;
implementing SPECS 2030, an initiative to support countries in reaching the more than 800 million people in need of refractive error services;
raising awareness on eye care through the development and provision of a range of materials and resources; and
observing and promoting World Sight Day as an annual advocacy event.
References
1. GBD 2019 Blindness and Vision Impairment Collaborators; Vision Loss Expert Group of the Global Burden of Disease Study. Causes of blindness and vision impairment in 2020 and trends over 30 years, and prevalence of avoidable blindness in relation to VISION 2020: the Right to Sight: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet Glob Health. 2021 Feb;9(2):e144-e160. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30489-7.
2. Fricke, TR, Tahhan N, Resnikoff S, Papas E, Burnett A, Suit MH, Naduvilath T, Naidoo K, Global Prevalence of Presbyopia and Vision Impairment from Uncorrected Presbyopia: Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Modelling, Ophthalmology. 2018 May 9.
3. Burton MJ, Ramke J, Marques AP, Bourne RR, Congdon N, Jones I, et al. The Lancet Global Health commission on Global Eye Health: vision beyond 2020. Lancet Glob Health. 2021; 9(4):e489–e551.
4. Bourne RRA, Cicinelli MV, Selby DA, Sedighi T, Tapply IH, et al. Effective refractive error coverage in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of updated estimates from population-based surveys in 76 countries modelling the path towards the 2030 global target. Lancet Glob Health. 2025 Aug;13(8):e1396-e1405.