Global
RegionsWHO Regional websitesAfricaAmericasSouth-East AsiaEuropeEastern MediterraneanWestern Pacific
Africa
Americas
South-East Asia
Europe
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
Home
Health Topics
All topics
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
ResourcesFact sheetsFacts in picturesMultimediaPodcastsPublicationsQuestions and answersTools and toolkits
Fact sheets
Facts in pictures
Multimedia
Podcasts
Publications
Questions and answers
Tools and toolkits
PopularDengueEndometriosisExcessive heatHerpesMental disordersMpox
Dengue
Endometriosis
Excessive heat
Herpes
Mental disorders
Mpox
Countries
All countries
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
RegionsAfricaAmericasEuropeEastern MediterraneanSouth-East AsiaWestern Pacific
Africa
Americas
Europe
Eastern Mediterranean
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
WHO in countriesData by countryCountry presenceCountry cooperation strategiesCountry office profilesStrengthening country offices
Data by country
Country presence
Country cooperation strategies
Country office profiles
Strengthening country offices
Newsroom
NewsroomNews releasesStatementsCampaignsEventsFeature storiesSpeechesCommentariesPhoto library
News releases
Statements
Campaigns
Events
Feature stories
Speeches
Commentaries
Photo library
Headlines
Emergencies
In focusCholeraEbola diseaseIsrael and the occupied Palestinian territoryMiddle EastSudanUkraine
Cholera
Ebola disease
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory
Middle East
Sudan
Ukraine
LatestDisease Outbreak NewsSituation reportsRapid risk assessmentsWeekly Epidemiological Record
Disease Outbreak News
Situation reports
Rapid risk assessments
Weekly Epidemiological Record
WHO in emergenciesSurveillanceAlert and responseOperationsResearchFundingPartnersHealth emergency appealsInternational Health RegulationsIndependent Oversight and Advisory Committee
Surveillance
Alert and response
Operations
Research
Funding
Partners
Health emergency appeals
International Health Regulations
Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee
Data
Data at WHOData hubGlobal Health EstimatesHealth inequalityGlobal Health Observatory
Data hub
Global Health Estimates
Health inequality
Global Health Observatory
DashboardsTriple Billion ProgressHealth Inequality MonitorDelivery for impactCOVID-19 dashboard
Triple Billion Progress
Health Inequality Monitor
Delivery for impact
COVID-19 dashboard
Data collectionClassificationsSCORESurveysCivil registration and vital statisticsRoutine health information systemsHarmonized health facility assessmentGIS centre for health
Classifications
SCORE
Surveys
Civil registration and vital statistics
Routine health information systems
Harmonized health facility assessment
GIS centre for health
ReportsWorld Health StatisticsUHC global monitoring report
World Health Statistics
UHC global monitoring report
About WHO
About WHOPartnershipsCommittees and advisory groupsCollaborating centresTechnical teamsOrganizational structureWho we are
Partnerships
Committees and advisory groups
Collaborating centres
Technical teams
Organizational structure
Who we are
Our workActivitiesInitiativesGeneral Programme of WorkWHO Academy
Activities
Initiatives
General Programme of Work
WHO Academy
FundingInvestment in WHOWHO Foundation
Investment in WHO
WHO Foundation
AccountabilityExternal auditFinancial statementsInternal audit and investigationsProgramme BudgetResults reports
External audit
Financial statements
Internal audit and investigations
Programme Budget
Results reports
GovernanceGoverning bodiesWorld Health AssemblyExecutive BoardMember States Portal
Governing bodies
World Health Assembly
Executive Board
Member States Portal
Home/
Newsroom/
Fact sheets/
Detail/
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Key factsCOVID-19 is a disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. There are a range of signs and symptoms, but hte most common symptoms reported for currently-circulating variants are fever, chills, and sore throat.Most people make a full recovery without needing treatment. People with severe disease or at risk of developing severe disease should seek medical care as soon as possible.Nearly 780 million cases and more than 7.1 million deaths due to COVID-19 have been reported worldwide since December 2019, but the actual number is thought to be higher.Over 13.64 billion COVID-19 vaccine doses had been administered by the end of 2024. WHO continues to recommend COVID-19 vaccination using a risk-based approach. WHO recommends a single dose for persons who have not yet received a COVID-19 vaccine. For those at high risk of severe COVID-19, revaccination may be needed 6-12 months after the most recent dose.COVID-19 continues to be a signficant public health concern, with global circulation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and hospitalizations and deaths continuing to occur.OverviewCOVID-19 is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which spreads through the air in infectious respiratory particles from an infected person. Transmission is more likely in close contact or shared indoor spaces. The virus can also spread by touching contaminated surfaces and then the eyes, nose or mouth.Because of increasing immunity from past infections and/or vaccination, most people recover without treatment. About 6% develop post COVID-19 condition (PCC, or long COVID), however, which can cause lasting symptoms such as memory issues, fatigue or breathing difficulties. PCC an affect daily life and requires individualized care.Older adults, people with underlying health conditions, and unvaccinated individuals are at higher risk of severe illness. Conditions that increase risk include diabetes, health or lung disease, obesity and weakened immune systems.Health and care workers face higher exposure risk due to their work environment.Vaccination remains a key preventive measure against severe disease. COVID-19 vaccines continue to provide strong protection against severe illness and death.SymptomsPeople may experience different symptoms with COVID-19.The most common symptoms are:feverchillssore throat.Less common symptoms are:muscle aches and heavy arms or legssevere fatigue or tirednessrunny or blocked nose, or sneezingheadachesore eyesdizzinessnew and persistent coughtight chest or chest painshortness of breathhoarse voicenumbness or tinglingappetite loss, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or diarrhoealoss or change of sense of taste or smelldifficulty sleeping.Immediate medical attention should be sought by people at risk of developing severe disease or with the following severe symptoms:difficulty breathing, especially at rest, or unable to speak in sentencesconfusiondrowsiness or loss of consciousnesspersistent pain or pressure in the chestskin being cold or clammy, or turning pale or a bluish colourloss of speech or movement.People who have underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing severe disease when they have COVID-19; they should seek medical help early if worried about their condition. These include:people with high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, chronic lung, heart, liver and/or kidney disaeses, cancer or dementia;people with rheumatological problems;women who are pregnant; andpeople with immunosuppression, such as those taking immunosuppressive medication or living with HIV.The potential consequences of severe COVID-19 include respiratory failure, sepsis, thromboembolism (blood clots), and multiorgan failure, including injury of the heart, liver or kidneys, and death.In rare situations, children can develop a severe inflammatory syndrome a few weeks after infection and may require medical attention and hospitalization.Some people who have had COVID-19, whether they needed hospitalization or not, continue to experience symptoms long after the infectious period has ended. These long-term effects are called post COVID-19 condition (PCC, or long COVID). The most common symptoms  include fatigue, aches and pains in muscles or joints, breathlessness, headaches, and difficulty in thinking or concentrating. Post COVID-19 condition can affect a person’s ability to perform daily activities such as work or household tasks.TransmissionSARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, spreads through the air via infectious respiratory particles released when an infected person breathes, talks, coughs, or sneezes. People are more likely to catch the virus when they are close to the infected person, or when they are sharing a closed space with them. The virus can also enter the body when someone touches contaminated surfaces like doorknobs or handles and then touches the eyes, nose or mouth.SARS-CoV-2 circulates throughout the year, causing outbreaks worldwide without an established seasonal pattern.Symptoms usually begin 3-6 days* after exposure (1) and last up to10 days, with some individuals experiencing symptoms for a longer period. Infected people may also spread the virus in the absence of symptoms or in the days prior to developing any symptoms.TreatmentMedical treatment exists for COVID-19, although most people recover from mild illness without needing treatment. For those who need treatment, health-care professionals suggest treatments for COVID-19 based on the severity of the disease and the risk of it getting worse. They consider the person’s age, symptoms, any coexisting health conditions, and individual factors which might interfere with specific treatments.PreventionThere are a number of things that people can do to prevent the spread of COVID-19. These are:if you      are experiencing COVID-like symptoms or have tested positive for COVID-19,      stay at home and away from others;avoid close      contact with individuals who may be at high risk of developing      complications if they get sick with COVID-19;if you      must be around other people, wear a properly fitted mask if you experience      any of the symptoms of COVID-19;cover your mouth and nose with a bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze,      and dispose of used tissues right away and clean your hands;clean your hands frequently with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub; andImprove indoor ventilation, e.g. by opening windows and doors to increase natural      airflow.Those providing care for high-risk individuals should wear a medical mask and test for COVID-19 if they develop any of the symptoms of COVID-19.There are a number of things that can be done to avoid becoming sick with COVID-19:  These are:avoid close      contact with people who are experiencing respiratory symptoms;avoid entering      crowded or poorly ventilated areas if you are at high-risk of developing      severe illness should you get sick with COVID-19; if you cannot avoid      entering crowded or poorly ventilated areas, wear a properly fitted mask; andclean your hands frequently with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub.To prevent severe illness, hospitalization and death due to COVID-19, vaccination should be considered, particularly if you are at higher risk of serious illness, or if you are a health and care worker caring for those at higher risk.Additional protective equipment should be considered for health workers taking part in aerosol-generating procedures, in consultation with occupational health and safety advisors.VaccinesSince their introduction, COVID-19 vaccines have saved millions of lives around the world by providing protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death.In November 2023, given that most of the global population had by that time been infected at least once, WHO updated its recommendations stating that a single dose of vaccine can be considered for those who have not yet been vaccinated. Revaccination against COVID-19 may be needed 6-12 months after the most recent dose for high priority groups such as older adults; individuals with severe obesity or multiple significant comorbidities, including diabetes, chronic lung diseases, heart, liver and kidney diseases; persons with immunocompromising conditions; pregnant women and health and care workers with direct patient contact.Even though vaccines protect against severe disease and death, they have limited impact on reducing transmission. It is still possible to spread COVID-19 to others if you are infected after being vaccinated.WHO advises on COVID-19 vaccination through its Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE). It is important to stay up to date with local recommendations provided by national health authories.WHO responseDuring the emergency phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, WHO coordinated the global response, supporting countries with preparedness, surveillance, diagnostics, clinical care, medical countermeasures, access to oxygen, country readiness and deployment of COVID-19 vaccines, vaccine safety monitoring, and evidence-based guidance. WHO recommended 13 vaccines for emergency use, guiding countries and UN agencies in their procurement, and led global coordination on research and development, and setting standards for vaccines, tests, and treatments. WHO also provided countries with strategic and policy recommendations, technical guidance, and tools.The Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, launched by WHO and partners, was an unprecedented global effort to rapidly develop and deploy diagnostics, treatments, and vaccines. COVAX, its vaccine pillar, proved a ground-breaking global initiative to accelerate vaccine development and production, and ensure equitable global access to COVID-19 vaccines.Since the Director-General of WHO lifted the Public Health Emergency of International Concern in May 2023 and theemergency phase ended, WHO has continued to lead the global COVID-19 response, working with governments and partners to shift from emergency measures to long-term, integrated management of COVID-19 and other coronavirus threats. Ongoing activities in this respect include regular issuance of  Disease Outbreak News posts, supporting ongoing research, updating guidance, monitoring virus trends, and evaluating vaccine composition.To guide this shift, WHO has developed astrategic and operational planto help countries manage COVID-19 as part of routine health systems. The plan promotes sustainable, evidence-based management of coronavirus threats, aligning COVID-19 responses with broader strategies for respiratory disease control and public health resilience.---*The Omicron variant virus strains, which now account for the vast majority of virus strains circulating in humans, have a shorter incubation period than pre-Omicron variant virus strains.---Reference1. Assessing changes in incubation period, serial interval, and generation time of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Xu, X., Wu, Y., Kummer, A.G.et al.BMC Med21, 374 (2023).https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-023-03070-8
Key facts
COVID-19 is a disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. There are a range of signs and symptoms, but hte most common symptoms reported for currently-circulating variants are fever, chills, and sore throat.
Most people make a full recovery without needing treatment. People with severe disease or at risk of developing severe disease should seek medical care as soon as possible.
Nearly 780 million cases and more than 7.1 million deaths due to COVID-19 have been reported worldwide since December 2019, but the actual number is thought to be higher.
Over 13.64 billion COVID-19 vaccine doses had been administered by the end of 2024. WHO continues to recommend COVID-19 vaccination using a risk-based approach. WHO recommends a single dose for persons who have not yet received a COVID-19 vaccine. For those at high risk of severe COVID-19, revaccination may be needed 6-12 months after the most recent dose.
COVID-19 continues to be a signficant public health concern, with global circulation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and hospitalizations and deaths continuing to occur.
Overview
COVID-19 is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which spreads through the air in infectious respiratory particles from an infected person. Transmission is more likely in close contact or shared indoor spaces. The virus can also spread by touching contaminated surfaces and then the eyes, nose or mouth.
Because of increasing immunity from past infections and/or vaccination, most people recover without treatment. About 6% develop post COVID-19 condition (PCC, or long COVID), however, which can cause lasting symptoms such as memory issues, fatigue or breathing difficulties. PCC an affect daily life and requires individualized care.
Older adults, people with underlying health conditions, and unvaccinated individuals are at higher risk of severe illness. Conditions that increase risk include diabetes, health or lung disease, obesity and weakened immune systems.
Health and care workers face higher exposure risk due to their work environment.
Vaccination remains a key preventive measure against severe disease. COVID-19 vaccines continue to provide strong protection against severe illness and death.
Symptoms
People may experience different symptoms with COVID-19.
The most common symptoms are:
fever
chills
sore throat.
Less common symptoms are:
muscle aches and heavy arms or legs
severe fatigue or tiredness
runny or blocked nose, or sneezing
headache
sore eyes
dizziness
new and persistent cough
tight chest or chest pain
shortness of breath
hoarse voice
numbness or tingling
appetite loss, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or diarrhoea
loss or change of sense of taste or smell
difficulty sleeping.
Immediate medical attention should be sought by people at risk of developing severe disease or with the following severe symptoms:
difficulty breathing, especially at rest, or unable to speak in sentences
confusion
drowsiness or loss of consciousness
persistent pain or pressure in the chest
skin being cold or clammy, or turning pale or a bluish colour
loss of speech or movement.
People who have underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing severe disease when they have COVID-19; they should seek medical help early if worried about their condition. These include:
people with high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, chronic lung, heart, liver and/or kidney disaeses, cancer or dementia;
people with rheumatological problems;
women who are pregnant; and
people with immunosuppression, such as those taking immunosuppressive medication or living with HIV.
The potential consequences of severe COVID-19 include respiratory failure, sepsis, thromboembolism (blood clots), and multiorgan failure, including injury of the heart, liver or kidneys, and death.
In rare situations, children can develop a severe inflammatory syndrome a few weeks after infection and may require medical attention and hospitalization.
Some people who have had COVID-19, whether they needed hospitalization or not, continue to experience symptoms long after the infectious period has ended. These long-term effects are called post COVID-19 condition (PCC, or long COVID). The most common symptoms  include fatigue, aches and pains in muscles or joints, breathlessness, headaches, and difficulty in thinking or concentrating. Post COVID-19 condition can affect a person’s ability to perform daily activities such as work or household tasks.
Transmission
SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, spreads through the air via infectious respiratory particles released when an infected person breathes, talks, coughs, or sneezes. People are more likely to catch the virus when they are close to the infected person, or when they are sharing a closed space with them. The virus can also enter the body when someone touches contaminated surfaces like doorknobs or handles and then touches the eyes, nose or mouth.
SARS-CoV-2 circulates throughout the year, causing outbreaks worldwide without an established seasonal pattern.
Symptoms usually begin 3-6 days* after exposure (1) and last up to10 days, with some individuals experiencing symptoms for a longer period. Infected people may also spread the virus in the absence of symptoms or in the days prior to developing any symptoms.
Treatment
Medical treatment exists for COVID-19, although most people recover from mild illness without needing treatment. For those who need treatment, health-care professionals suggest treatments for COVID-19 based on the severity of the disease and the risk of it getting worse. They consider the person’s age, symptoms, any coexisting health conditions, and individual factors which might interfere with specific treatments.
Prevention
There are a number of things that people can do to prevent the spread of COVID-19. These are:
if you      are experiencing COVID-like symptoms or have tested positive for COVID-19,      stay at home and away from others;
avoid close      contact with individuals who may be at high risk of developing      complications if they get sick with COVID-19;
if you      must be around other people, wear a properly fitted mask if you experience      any of the symptoms of COVID-19;
cover your mouth and nose with a bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze,      and dispose of used tissues right away and clean your hands;
clean your hands frequently with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub; and
Improve indoor ventilation, e.g. by opening windows and doors to increase natural      airflow.
Those providing care for high-risk individuals should wear a medical mask and test for COVID-19 if they develop any of the symptoms of COVID-19.
There are a number of things that can be done to avoid becoming sick with COVID-19:  These are:
avoid close      contact with people who are experiencing respiratory symptoms;
avoid entering      crowded or poorly ventilated areas if you are at high-risk of developing      severe illness should you get sick with COVID-19; if you cannot avoid      entering crowded or poorly ventilated areas, wear a properly fitted mask; and
clean your hands frequently with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub.
To prevent severe illness, hospitalization and death due to COVID-19, vaccination should be considered, particularly if you are at higher risk of serious illness, or if you are a health and care worker caring for those at higher risk.
Additional protective equipment should be considered for health workers taking part in aerosol-generating procedures, in consultation with occupational health and safety advisors.
Vaccines
Since their introduction, COVID-19 vaccines have saved millions of lives around the world by providing protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death.
In November 2023, given that most of the global population had by that time been infected at least once, WHO updated its recommendations stating that a single dose of vaccine can be considered for those who have not yet been vaccinated. Revaccination against COVID-19 may be needed 6-12 months after the most recent dose for high priority groups such as older adults; individuals with severe obesity or multiple significant comorbidities, including diabetes, chronic lung diseases, heart, liver and kidney diseases; persons with immunocompromising conditions; pregnant women and health and care workers with direct patient contact.
Even though vaccines protect against severe disease and death, they have limited impact on reducing transmission. It is still possible to spread COVID-19 to others if you are infected after being vaccinated.
WHO advises on COVID-19 vaccination through its Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE). It is important to stay up to date with local recommendations provided by national health authories.
WHO response
During the emergency phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, WHO coordinated the global response, supporting countries with preparedness, surveillance, diagnostics, clinical care, medical countermeasures, access to oxygen, country readiness and deployment of COVID-19 vaccines, vaccine safety monitoring, and evidence-based guidance. WHO recommended 13 vaccines for emergency use, guiding countries and UN agencies in their procurement, and led global coordination on research and development, and setting standards for vaccines, tests, and treatments. WHO also provided countries with strategic and policy recommendations, technical guidance, and tools.
The Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, launched by WHO and partners, was an unprecedented global effort to rapidly develop and deploy diagnostics, treatments, and vaccines. COVAX, its vaccine pillar, proved a ground-breaking global initiative to accelerate vaccine development and production, and ensure equitable global access to COVID-19 vaccines.
Since the Director-General of WHO lifted the Public Health Emergency of International Concern in May 2023 and theemergency phase ended, WHO has continued to lead the global COVID-19 response, working with governments and partners to shift from emergency measures to long-term, integrated management of COVID-19 and other coronavirus threats. Ongoing activities in this respect include regular issuance of  Disease Outbreak News posts, supporting ongoing research, updating guidance, monitoring virus trends, and evaluating vaccine composition.
To guide this shift, WHO has developed astrategic and operational planto help countries manage COVID-19 as part of routine health systems. The plan promotes sustainable, evidence-based management of coronavirus threats, aligning COVID-19 responses with broader strategies for respiratory disease control and public health resilience.
---
---
Reference
1. Assessing changes in incubation period, serial interval, and generation time of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Xu, X., Wu, Y., Kummer, A.G.et al.BMC Med21, 374 (2023).https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-023-03070-8
Related
Advice, guidance, response and ongoing research
COVID-19 vaccines
WHO roadmap on uses of COVID-19 vaccines in the context of Omicron and high population immunity
Therapeutics for people with COVID-19
Strategic and operational plan for coronavirus disease threat management: at a glance
Increasing COVID-19 vaccine uptake: An update on messaging, delivery strategies and policy recommendations
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE)
Disease Outbreak News (DONs)
Training courses on COVID-19
More on WHO's work on COVID-19
Fact sheets
RegionsAfricaAmericasEastern MediterraneanEuropeSouth-East AsiaWestern Pacific
Africa
Americas
Eastern Mediterranean
Europe
South-East Asia
Western Pacific
PoliciesCybersecurityEthicsInformation disclosurePermissions and licensingPreventing sexual exploitationTerms of use
Cybersecurity
Ethics
Information disclosure
Permissions and licensing
Preventing sexual exploitation
Terms of use
About usCareersFrequently asked questionsLibraryProcurementPublications
Careers
Frequently asked questions
Library
Procurement
Publications
Contact us